README.md, before:

# @perry-rylance/midi
TypeScript library for parsing, building, serializing and debugging MIDI.

There are many JS / TS MIDI parsers online, this library is unique in that not only parses MIDI, it also allows you to construct MIDI from scratch, or alter existing MIDI, in a type-safe and strict fashion. This library will let you programatically build MIDI files and guide you along the way without allowing you to write invalid data. Almost no knowledge of the MIDI spec is required, simply install and start using the library.

## Examples
- The [Microtonal cyclic polyrhythm generator](https://github.com/PerryRylance/microtonal-cyclic-polyrhythm-generator) demonstrates generating MIDI and extending this libraries modules.

## Usage

### Reading MIDI data
- Get your data into an `ArrayBuffer`
- Instantiate a `new ReadStream` with your `ArrayBuffer`
- Instantiate a `new File`
- Call `readBytes` passing in your `ReadStream`

### Creating MIDI data
- Instantiate a `new File`
- Instantiate a `new Track` and push it to your files `tracks`
- Instantiate any subclasses of `Event` you need, eg `NoteOnEvent`
- Push your events to the tracks `events`

### Writing MIDI data
- You'll need a `File` either read in or created from scratch as described above
- Instantiate a `new WriteStream`
- Call `writeBytes` on your `File` passing in your `WriteStream`
- You can use `toArrayBuffer` from the `WriteStream` then do whatever you need
- `toDataURL` is also provided for convenience

## Development
Clone this repository and run `npm install`.

Run `npm run dev` during development to see TypeScript errors.

## Testing
Run `npm run test` to run the entire test suite.

To run individual tests, run `node node_modules/jest/bin/jest.js -i /tests/FileLibrary.test.ts -t "Reads tests\\files\\test-illegal-message-fe.mid"` replacing the argument for `-t` with the name of the test you wish to run.

## Credits
- With thanks to [Recording Blogs](https://www.recordingblogs.com/wiki/musical-instrument-digital-interface-midi), [Teragon Audio](http://midi.teragonaudio.com/tech/midispec/run.htm) and [Mido](https://mido.readthedocs.io/en/latest/meta_message_types.html) for insight into the MIDI spec.
- With thanks to [jazz-soft](https://github.com/jazz-soft/test-midi-files) for the test files.

Commit message:

1.1.0
- Regress omitDelta and event write options
- Delta serialize / deserialize now handled by Track

README.md, after:

# @perry-rylance/midi
TypeScript library for parsing, building, serializing and debugging MIDI.

There are many JS / TS MIDI parsers online, this library is unique in that not only parses MIDI, it also allows you to construct MIDI from scratch, or alter existing MIDI, in a type-safe and strict fashion. This library will let you programatically build MIDI files and guide you along the way without allowing you to write invalid data. Almost no knowledge of the MIDI spec is required, simply install and start using the library.

## Examples
- The [Microtonal cyclic polyrhythm generator](https://github.com/PerryRylance/microtonal-cyclic-polyrhythm-generator) demonstrates generating MIDI and extending this libraries modules.

## Usage

### Reading MIDI data
- Get your data into an `ArrayBuffer`
- Instantiate a `new ReadStream` with your `ArrayBuffer`
- Instantiate a `new File`
- Call `readBytes` passing in your `ReadStream`

### Creating MIDI data
- Instantiate a `new File`
- Instantiate a `new Track` and push it to your files `tracks`
- Instantiate any subclasses of `Event` you need, eg `NoteOnEvent`
- Push your events to the tracks `events`

### Writing MIDI data
- You'll need a `File` either read in or created from scratch as described above
- Instantiate a `new WriteStream`
- Call `writeBytes` on your `File` passing in your `WriteStream`
- You can use `toArrayBuffer` from the `WriteStream` then do whatever you need
- `toDataURL` is also provided for convenience

## Version overview
### 1.1.*
This library was originally conceived to work purely with files and not with real-time streams. 1.1.0 introduces some changes that make working with real-time streams easier. MIDI delta time is a concept that relates strictly to files with tracks, as opposed to real-time streams do not use delta time on events at all - we simply need to send events down the stream and timing is left entirely up to the device sending.

With that in mind, 1.1.0 introduces some changes to the internal implementation of how streams read and write events. Delta time is now read and written by the track, during read operations this is then passed down to the event factory. This means that we can now work with pure events in the context of a stream without having to worry about workarounds to remove delta time.

This should not break any projects that use this library, but may break projects that extend our classes or depend on the implementation handling delta time at an event level.

### 1.0.*
Initial release.

## Development
Clone this repository and run `npm install`.

Run `npm run dev` during development to see TypeScript errors.

## Testing
Run `npm run test` to run the entire test suite.

To run individual tests, run `node node_modules/jest/bin/jest.js -i /tests/FileLibrary.test.ts -t "Reads tests\\files\\test-illegal-message-fe.mid"` replacing the argument for `-t` with the name of the test you wish to run.

## Credits
- With thanks to [Recording Blogs](https://www.recordingblogs.com/wiki/musical-instrument-digital-interface-midi), [Teragon Audio](http://midi.teragonaudio.com/tech/midispec/run.htm) and [Mido](https://mido.readthedocs.io/en/latest/meta_message_types.html) for insight into the MIDI spec.
- With thanks to [jazz-soft](https://github.com/jazz-soft/test-midi-files) for the test files.
